1.0 1.11.0 1.2SORS ‘Science-Inspiration’ PackTable of ContentsSORS ‘Science-Inspiration’ Pack	2Foreword	3How to use this guide	3Graph Reading	5What is it?	6In the game…	6Discussion points:	6Play it:	6Why is it important to learn about this?	7Time Management	7What is it?	7In the game	7Discussion points:	8Why is it important to learn about this?	8S.O.R.S	8What Is It?	9In the game…	9Discussion points:	10Why is it important to learn about this?	10Diseases & Treatments	10What is it?	11In the game…	11Discussion points:	11Why is it important to learn about this?	12Personality Types	12What is it?	12In the game…	13Discussion points:	14Why is it important to learn about this?	14Population Size	14What is it?	14In the game…	15Discussion points:	15Why is it important to learn about this?	16Space on Earth as a natural resource	16What is it?	16In the game…	17Discussion points:	17Why is it important to learn about this?	18Appendix	18Outline:- 1. why use this guide?o How vid games help learning (esp. w/science)o Acknowledges what in the game is real vs ‘made up/enhanced’ for the game- 2. How guide arranged- 3. Reminder to play SORS!- 4. Guide- 5. About SORS- MENTION THAT SECTIONS CONTAIN AN ARRAY OF RESOURCES, FROM SIMPLE ALL THE WAY TO SCIENCE PAPERS FOR ADVANCED/ENTHUSIASTIC STUDENTS- MENTION STUDY ABOUT IMPORTANT QUESTIONS STUDENTS ASK WHEN LEARNING WITH VIDEO GAMESForewordThank you for purchasing SORS. It has been a labour of love, and I hope you like it. What drove me to make SORS was, is, a gap in the games market. There are commercial games, which are works of fiction created purely to entertain. There are educational games, which take a part of a syllabus somewhere and aim to teach you about it, and are sometimes entertaining.SORS is different. It is a commercial game (and one that I hope you find entertaining), but it is firmly grounded in real science. It is the game equivalent of a wildlife documentary, or a history channel reconstruction. It is something different.Play the game. Get sucked into the near-future it presents, where the world’s population is reaching breaking point. Work through the moral questions it raises. I hope you enjoy it, but I hope even more that you come out the other end with a new interest in some part of the science it covered. Its goal is not to teach, but to inspire interest in science. How to use this guideThis guide focuses on the aspects of the game that relate most closely to real life. These broadly fall in to two categories:1. Science related facts and inspirations in the game.2. Real-world problems mentioned in the game.This guide is to help you remember and discuss these points in whatever forum you want. It also poses some initial questions to help discussion, but these points are just suggestive and of course you can take the discussion in any way you want.IntroductionSORS aims to take the player on a journey, through the fictionalised world it presents. In that respect it is a lot like most other videogames. However, unlike a lot of other games, the SORS universe is inspired by reality and real-world topics.This guide is your bridge between the fiction of SORS and the real-life counterparts that inspired it.But why? Why does this guide exist? Why bother reading it?Video games present a unique learning environment. We hope that SORS and this guide can be used by educators to help teach the areas covered in the game. This guide introduces topics briefly but, crucially, with references. There are plenty of devoted learning guides available (both online and offline) for each of the topics discussed. The purpose of this guide is not to re-hash information available elsewhere; instead it is a map through which to engage learners in these particular areas, by giving them in-game experience of the topic before they learn about it. This provides them with a valuable anchor of experience, from which they can venture out and learn more about the topics.References have been carefully selected to fulfil one of two criteria:1. Provide further information at the education level for that section. These are coloured blue.2. Provide further information at a higher (but achievable level) level than that section. These are for ambitious readers who wish to push themselves in the topic area.  These are coloured green.About SORS the gameSORS is inspired by real science but is designed to be a stand-alone fun, engaging experience. It is targeted at both educational and leisure players.It covers topics in a way that allows for free thinking, discussions and exploratory learning. It does NOT aim to help players learn a list of facts.We hope you appreciate what SORS is trying to do – to inspire learners to engage with topics, so that they approach learning with an enthusiastic desire to learn about the area. This guide aims to empower players by highlighting the areas of that game that intersect with real-life topics, thus providing a stepping stone into the learning discussions that can be had – but with learners already with some knowledge on the area having played the game.w Who should use this guide?Anyone! Although the target audience is (science) educators, the guide does not use jargon and so can, and hopefully will, be used by anyone.Contents1. Intro2. Skills used in the gamea. Graph readingb. Time managementc. Degrees of confidence (diagnosing patients)3. The Science- a. SORS technologyb. Diseasesc. Treatmentsd. Personality types4. Real World topics-a. Population sizeb. Hippocratic oathc. Euthanasiad. Space (on earth) as a natural resourceIntroductionWhat is this guide?This guide can help you use the game SORS in an educational context. Did you know:* Playing science-based games increases fact retention and could motivate children to pursue scientific careers* Contemporary learning theory suggests people learn better through personal experiences rather than abstract calculations or generalizations* Commerical video games are being used in classrooms to teach STEM subjectsThis guide is to help highlight science topics for discussion from the game, but also integrate with some game design questions to help players examine the game they’ve just played.Skills used in the gameGraph Reading(Maths, Key Stage 3, GCSE)What is it?The graphs in the game are known as scatter diagrams, and are used to represent and compare two sets of data (http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/maths/statistics/scatterdiagramsrev1.shtml). Graphs such as scatter diagrams can be used to see whether there is any relationship between two sets of data.Scatterplots are just one of many types of graphs, or ‘figures’, that can be used to display data and relationships between sets of data. Part of the skill of using graphs involves selecting the right graph format for your dataset (http://www.mathgoodies.com/lessons/graphs/compare_graphs.html).Play it:Suggested game levels: 2 – 20.Some levels contain more diseases to scan for on the graph:Levels 2 - 4 contain 1 disease. Levels 5 - 17 contain 2 diseases. Levels 18 - 20 contain 3 diseases. Play on these levels to test your graph reading skills!In the game…In SORS graphs are used to see whether the patient has a condition. Players look for the corresponding data pattern (based on example graphs) to help them diagnose the patient.To do well in the game, players should develop certain skills when reading the graphs:* Identify what points are useful when trying to diagnose a patient* Take note of variance. Points will not be the same every time, and may be higher or lower on the x or y axis. However overall patterns will stay the same. * Ignore false data points, created by bad scansDiscussion points:* Which diseases have the easiest graphs to use & remember in the game? And the hardest? Why?* How many points did players typically have to find before they could diagnose a patient confidently?* Were players ever 100% sure when they diagnosed a patient? If not, why not?* Do you think this degree of confidence felt in the game is similar to how doctors work in real life? Should this affect how doctors are treated when they incorrectly diagnose someone?Why is it important to learn about this?Graphs are used to represent data in every part of life. You’ll see them on the news, in magazines, in scientific papers and in adverts. Being comfortable in reading them will help you understand what these graphs tell you, and, more importantly, will help you ascertain whether you should believe the graph or not.Some people, as this blog shows (http://www.statisticshowto.com/misleading-graphs/), will try to mislead you through the use of graphs (and other data visualisations) and the best way to avoid this is to be comfortable with graphs and interpreting the data they represent.Time Management (Generic Competency, GMC Generic Curriculum for Medical Specialties)What is it?A general term used to describe how someone uses their time – if they prioritise tasks well, work without distraction and consequently achieve a good amount within a certain time period. A useful skill in any environment, but particularly in medical settings where often decisions must be made as quickly and accurately as possible.Play it:Suggested game levels: 3, 16, 21.These levels give a good range of tests for a player’s time management skills. Level 3 is when time is first introduced, and as such is a minor pressure on the player (with only a couple of diseases to diagnose per patient).Level 16 is after the accuracy target has been increased, and some more diseases have been added. As such the player has to consider more factors, and be more accurate, for each patient. Time is more of a pressure here than it was in the earlier levels.Level 21 is when the last disease is added. Consequently, it represents one of the hardest levels – here players have to consider all diseases when diagnosing a patient.In the gameTo progress in the game, players must pass ‘scanning sessions’. These sessions consist of seeing ‘x number of patients in x minutes’. Time management is critical in these sessions to ensure you can get through all the patients in the given time. To do well in the game players must be aware of the time constantly:* Take note of time per patient, and try and stick to it (total time available / number of patients).* Where possible, commit things to memory. Nothing drains time more than having to check graphs or treatment info in the diagnosis guide* Collect and use time bonuses (found during email conversations). These can be lifesavers during scanning sessions.* Make good tactical decisions. If you’ve been stuck on a patient for a while, maybe it’s best to try and diagnose them with what information you have and move on.* Manipulate the game! If you only need to get 80% accuracy with 5 patients, you can afford to get one wrong, and you can do so quickly in order to give you more time with the others. Obviously not possible in real life, but in the game, it’s ok (although be prepared to receive angry emails from relatives if you do ignore someone).Discussion points:* Are these ever increasing ‘government targets’ reflective of what happens in real hospitals?* Are these targets good, bad or somewhere in between?* Did players ever calculate their ‘time per patient’? Or did they just play and adapt?* Did players ever make decisions to discharge a patient early so that they’d have enough time to see all patients? * With targets set in real life, do you think this also happens?Why is it important to learn about this?Time management is a key skill in all jobs in life. Being able to manage your time effectively will help you achieve more things on a day-to-day basis, hopefully leading to a less stressful, more rewarding life.How does the game challenge me to think about this?Players will not pass levels unless they manage their time effectively to get through all the patients in a session. As players will know soon on in a level if they’re failing, players are encouraged to evaluate their performance themselves and try different tactics or approaches to help improve their performance.The ScienceS.O.R.S(Chemistry, undergraduate level)What Is It?SORS stands for Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy. It is a variant of Raman spectroscopy, which relies on the phenomenon that light can be deflected when it hits matter.Usually the deflected light is at the same wavelength as the initial light. However, 1 in every 30 million photons (light is made up of photons) are deflected at a different wavelength, and this wavelength varies depending on the composition of the molecule (matter) that is deflected it. Therefore tracking these ‘unusual’ photons can help identify what molecule the light was shining at. This is the basis of Raman Spectroscopy, where a laser is used to shine light at specific materials to help analyse them. (http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/seeinglife/science/research/Raman/Raman.html)Raman spectroscopy is usually limited to near-surface diffusion detection, ie: it can’t measure very deep materials or past surfaces because of high interference levels at the point where the laser hits the material. SORS gets around this because measurements of deflected light wavelengths happen at a different location to where the light hits the material, hence the pre-fix ‘spatially offset’.Two huge benefits that SORS-based treatments can offer are greater accuracy and being able to diagnose non-invasively (not needing to break the skin or enter a body cavity) (file:///Users/richardchatwin/Dropbox/science%20Gamed/Game%20Proposals/SORS/CAN004%20-%20Biomedical%20Applications%20of%20SORS.pdf).Play it:Suggested levels: 2+S.O.R.S is introduced as a game mechanic from level 2 onwards. Later levels present more of a challenge as more diseases are diagnosed using the S.O.R.S graph. Pick earlier levels for beginners, later levels for more confident players.In the game…The game fairly accurately conveys the potential uses of SORS in a medical context. The technology is being trialled at a UK hospital to improve detection of osteoporosis (http://stfc.ac.uk/CLF/News+and+Events/News/20336.aspx?pf=1). Studies have also been done on using it to improve detection of breast tumours(file:///Users/richardchatwin/Dropbox/science%20Gamed/Game%20Proposals/SORS/Raman%20spec%20breast%20tumor%20surgery.pdf), and glucose levels (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3229825/). A variant of SORS, Surface-enhanced SORS (SESORS) is being looked at to diagnosing cancer and HIV with the help of nanoparticles. (http://www.hindawi.com/journals/jnm/2011/202187/).The graphs models used in the game are also directly based off graphs from published scientific papers. Graph patterns are modelled off actual results. For example, the fact that in the game players must look for lowered phosphate/collagen levels to diagnose osteoporosis is not coincidence. This is how real-life S.O.R.S is used to identify osteoporosis in bone samples.(reference needed)The ‘scanning room’ in the game is, however, entirely fictional. As SORS does not exist as a mainstream procedure in hospitals yet, the game layout, where the patient is, and the interface were all imagined.Discussion points:* Is non-invasive diagnosis the future of medicine? Perhaps even non-invasive treatments? What technologies would be needed to achieve non-invasive treatments?* How important is it that the public knows how these diagnostic techniques (such as SORS) work? And how much do they need to know? Will understanding help in other ways?* Did players find the layout of the ‘scanning room’ strange in any way? How about their view of the patient? What would they change and why?* Was it strange they couldn’t see the patient’s face, or did it make their job easier?Why is it important to learn about this?Aside from the (hopefully) interesting mechanics of how light can be used to measure the composition of tissue, learning about this SORS technology can be useful for 2 reasons: 1. To gain an appreciation for the lifecycle of healthcare technology and subsequently the benefit of exploratory scientific research. Looking at SORS as an example, it has taken over 80 years before a scientific observation has been turned into a piece of technology that can be utilised for healthcare.This observation will hopefully make you think about the following question: what’s the best way to decide what scientific research to pursue now?2. One of the benefits of this technology is that it is non-invasive. This kind of technology is considered new, innovative and bringing us closer to a ‘Star Trek’ like era - http://www.nsbri.org/newsflash/indivArticle.asp?id=454&articleID=78How does the game challenge me to think about this?The game’s story is fictional, but the medical setting is based on real technology. It hopefully has given you a glimpse of what could be possible with new technologies! The game presents a view of how doctors could use medical technology to quickly diagnose patients – it’s up to you to decide if you agree with it or not.Diseases & Treatments(Biology, GCSE & A-Level)What is it?The diseases featured in the game are all real and were chosen based on the applications of the SORS technology (see above). These diseases are: Osteoporosis, HIV, Diabetes and Cancers (Breast, Gastrointestinal and Lung).These diseases range from extremely common (diabetes affects c2.9 million in the UK alone) to rare (stomach cancer affects 7,300 people in the UK each year). (http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/osteoporosis/Pages/Introduction.aspx)All the information on these diseases in the game was taken from the NHS choices website, which contains a lot of very useful information, including symptoms.Play it:Suggested levels based on disease:* Lifestyle advice – level 1* Diabetes – level 4* Osteoporosis – level 8* Lung & GI Cancers  - level 16* Breast Cancer – Level 20* HIV – Level 21In these levels all the treatments for a disease are unlocked and available to the player.In the game…The diagnosis guide in the game tells players everything they need to know about diagnosing and treating the various diseases in the game. It also contains background information if players are interested in knowing more about a particular disease.Treatment information in the game was also taken from the NHS website and is based on real treatments for those diseases, albeit simplified for the game.It’s an unfortunate but necessary simplification. The game could have included all 5 or 6 drugs for osteoporosis, had the player check whether they were dealing with a postmenopausal woman who had or hadn’t had fractures before, etc, but as you can see this level of detail would have made the game very complicated and probably not as accessible to those without some priori knowledge of biology/medicine.It should be mentioned that the game does not reflect how these diseases are currently diagnosed and treated in UK hospitals. In-game diagnostic procedures for each disease are based on the potential of the SORS technology, meaning they are not currently how hospitals and doctors would diagnose those diseases. It’s also worth highlighting that the frequency of these diseases in the game is not accurate. You would have to be very unlucky to be afflicted with osteoporosis, a cancer and AIDS (it’s not impossible, but statistically unlikely). Also in the game, there are younger people who seem to be afflicted with these diseases. Again, it’s not impossible, but just very unlikely that someone aged 35 would have osteoporosis.Discussion points:* Do players remember any of the information from the game about these diseases? * Was it interesting to read about them in this way (ie: during the game)?* Could the information have been presented in a better way? How? And why would this be an improvement?* Did any players think that the treatments were too simplistic/inaccurate when they first saw them in the game?* Should more accurate treatment information have been attempted? If so, how?* Is it irresponsible to put such treatment information in a game, running the risk of influencing or affecting players who may have, or know someone who has, a condition in the game?Why is it important to learn about this?These diseases afflict our bodies in very different ways. By learning about these diseases, you can gain understanding of how the body works, what can go wrong with it, and the range and types of treatments available to these diseases (injections, drugs or more intensive treatment like surgery or chemotherapy).How does the game challenge me to think about this?Personality Types(Careers, A-level)What is it?Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung first published his theory on personality types in 1921(in German). The first English publication was in 1971, after his death. In the publication Psychological Types, Jung categorized people into types. These types consist of: REFERENCE NEEDED* Two perceiving functions (Sensation and Intuition)* Two judging functions (Thinking and Feeling)* These functions are modified by two attitude types: o Extraversion o Introversion.These types were eventually integrated into personality tests, to help individuals analyse their personality. The most famous of these is the Myers-Briggs personality test.These tests are commonly used by companies to help employees establish their personality types, so they know how they work best, how best to interact with others and how others can best interact with them.As can be expected, these personality tests have their critics and should only be used to provide "a framework for understanding individual differences, and … a dynamic model of individual development", as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator is designed for (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myers-Briggs_Type_Indicator).Play it:Suggested level: 11+Patient chat is unlocked from this level onwards.In the game…Personality types are used as a basis for the four actions of the patient chat mechanic. These four actions are based on common characteristics of the various personality types. Job titles are also based on ‘possible career paths’ for these types (although it should be highlighted, as above, that these types are nothing more than frameworks and certainly should not be seen to ‘force’ people into certain career choices). Job type suggestions are usually used to highlight what professions someone could enjoy, based on their profiling, but it is never anything more than that – a suggestion.The whole patient chat system is based on the theory that communicating differently with different types of personality will yield better results, ie: there is no one method for communicating effectively with every person. NEED REFERENCEThe four choices, explained in more depth, are:1. Inquire – used to communicate with sociable people who will be more interested in asking questions to satisfy themselves than listening to details.2. Listen – used to communicate with ‘leaders’, a category derived from the personality types. These may be extroverts (or introverts) who are more influenced by thinking than feeling, and are typically more judgers than perceivers. These people might be extroverts but expect to do most of the talking.3. Explain – used to communicate with analytical types who enjoy understanding topics in great detail. The best way to appeal to this group is to explain a topic in enough detail for them to understand it to their satisfaction, a very different approach to the ‘inquire’ option above. An example job title is scientist. 4. Empathise - used to communicate with sociable people (often extroverts). These people often thrive on human interaction and enjoy conversations with others, even small talk.These commands were generated from personality descriptions based on the Myers-Briggs test.Discussion points:* How aware are players of the concept of personality types and what they mean?* How reliable are personality tests? To what extent should they be considered as measures of character?* Did the four commands in the game give enough variation of personality types, or should there have been more? Would adding more have made this part of the game too complicated?* If players are aware of their personality types, was there any correlation between player personality types and the choices they made in the game?Why is it important to learn about this?Personality types offer a way to view ourselves, our likes, dislikes and how we behave in certain situations. The power in this knowledge comes not from blindly accepting a profile the test gives you, but using it as a starting point to examine yourself and asking certain questions about your behaviour, such as:* What situations make you most (un)comfortable? Why?* What type of work do you most enjoy? What particular aspects of it are the most enjoyable?* How do you behave when meeting new people?This type of self-awareness can have great benefits in many working environments, and this is why many businesses run new recruits through a personality test.For example, if you realize that you’re put off by reading large chunks of data, you can make people you work with aware of this when they’re presenting things to you. You can also work on your own skills so that you start to feel more comfortable in this scenario. Another example is teamwork. You may find from the test that you have extrovert tendencies (being very sociable, speaking a lot, etc). These behaviours may intimidate, or annoy, introverts. This can make group work difficult, it you’re partnered with different personality types. Simply knowing that you do these things can mean you work better in groups with people of other personality types.http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/businessclub/management-advice/11264179/Good-schools-should-help-pupils-to-pass-the-personality-test-for-work.htmlPopulation Size(Geography, GCSE, A-level)What is it?The global population size currently stands at roughly 7.2 billion, and continues to rise. The rate at which it rises is known as the population growth rate (a term applied either to country population growth or global growth).The population growth rate is calculated for a specific time period using birth rates, death rates and immigration rates. This growth rate has actually decreased since its peak in the 1960s, although advancements in medical technology, living standards and other areas have led to an increased life expectancy for humans, meaning that overall the global population has grown.Thomas Malthus was the first economist to properly tackle the subject of population size in his book Essay on the Principle of Population (1798). He envisaged a growing world population rising to potentially 250 billion people in 200 years, but with the planet only capable of sustaining 9 billion (http://cgge.aag.org/PopulationandNaturalResources1e/CF_PopNatRes_Jan10/CF_PopNatRes_Jan108.html).Malthus saw the world’s population being kept in check by things that could shorten human lifespans, such as war, disease and famine. He also thought that future population control would be via men realising a ‘moral duty’ to have smaller families.China is currently has the largest population of any country (1.3 billion). In the 1970’s a ‘one-child’ policy was introduced to limit families to one child only. The policy only covers c40% of the population (as it is not applied in every circumstance) and has many critics, especially human rights groups, as there are accusations of high infanticide rates in China (even though it is illegal). Play it:tbcIn the game…The story line in the game concerns the global population. When the player starts the game, they enter into a world that is on the brink of a population crisis – that is, reaching a population level that is not sustainable by the planet.There have already been major events/changes to every day life that have been made to accommodate the ever-growing population. These can be seen in prison ships, and how people live and commute between huge skyscrapers (both these relate to the use of building ‘upwards’ and using the sky as a way to house more people). There is also the worrying annual event known as ‘EE day’ (euthanasia is discussed here as a separate topic).Amazingly, it seems it has taken this population crisis to get the world governments to work together on the problem (as indicated by the numerous ‘news alerts’ players get).Discussion points:* Do players have their own thoughts how to avoid or fix a population crisis? Are these solutions morally acceptable?* Do players believe the world presented in the game could possible happen? For example, would governments ever think of commissioning ‘prison ships’? If not, why not?* How would a population crisis like the one portrayed in the game affect healthcare in the UK? (feel free to choose a different country).Why is it important to learn about this?The problem of population growth is interesting for two reasons. Firstly, it is a component of so many other problems currently being addressed. For example, climate change, food shortages and disease outbreaks all have facets that are linked to population size. Therefore it is an important problem to consider.Secondly, it represents a extremely difficult moral problem. The easiest way to highlight this is to just refer back to the discussion points – can you think of a way to fix or address the problem of population growth without infringing on others’ basic human rights?It also represents a type of problem that we, as humans, are not very good at solving – the long-term problem. Like climate change, this issue probably won’t affect the current generations of humans who inhabit the earth. But does that mean we shouldn’t start trying to solve it? Space on Earth as a natural resource(Geography, Keystages 3 & 4)What is it?A lot of focus is currently on natural resources that will run out, such as coal. One similar resource that is not focussed on is space (probably because it won’t run out for a while). There are often problems finding enough space to house everyone around densely populated areas such as cities. This has led to the evolution of the multi-storied buildings as housing blocks in cities around the world. Building new housing areas takes space and often ignites concerns about preserving wildlife and grass/forest land. The biggest example of this of recent times is the amazon rainforest – as of 2013 almost 20% of the original rainforest has been removed to make way for housing, farming or other causes. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deforestation_of_the_Amazon_rainforest)Play it:tbcIn the game…In the fictional game world, several solutions are to finding more space for people are mentioned by characters. It is mentioned that people now all live in high rise buildings that are interconnected, removing the need for cars or individual transport (all buildings are linked via trams and pedwalks, tubes that go between buildings). A variation of these buildings, known as ‘slumscrapers’, is also mentioned. These are the modern equivalent of affordable housing, where instead of a whole house, those who need it are given minimal space and crammed together into floors.Prison ships are also mentioned, which use renewable solar energy to power themselves constantly, meaning they can stay afloat and not need to land, thus removing the need to build prisons on earth.These concepts together present an idea of humanity building ‘upwards’, to make use of the space in the sky as a solution to the population and space problem. Ironically, this mass movement towards adopting skyscrapers as common buildings, moving mass transport systems to run between buildings and using the sky has lead to the creation of  ‘Ground Level’. Where the very poor, exiled or forgotten go, this refers to the space (what’s left of it) that exists on the actual ground, in between the buildings. This area has been disregarded (as people have moved into skyscrapers) and thus nature has encroached on what once were city streets or neighbourhoods.Also mentioned is that the hospital where the player works (along with some other places of business) now house employees, and also provides socialising areas on the upper levels of the hospital.Discussion points:- Do players have their own solutions for coping with a huge population surge? Is building up the answer?- Are there any new technologies needed before the solutions in the game could be implemented? What about for players’ other ideas for coping with huge populations?- Could ships (in the earth’s atmosphere) be an answer? What are the risks of having ships that do not need to land? Would it be possible? Would people mind living on them?- Would removing cars and other personal transport be a good step towards making more space for humans? Could mass transport systems be the answer, or would people resist being forced to use them?- Based on current population growth rates, when would we need to start thinking about these sorts of solutions?Why is it important to learn about this?Appendix Designer’s notes (Time Management):Real doctors are under time pressures (most jobs are), so it felt right to include a time limitation for players.Lots of games use timers to add tension and challenge players. Some are explicit (like in SORS) but others are more subtle time pressures. A good example is in any real-time strategy game (eg: the StarCraft series). Although there is normally no timer, when players start their base, they will only have a certain amount of time before they’re attacked, and this means they need to make good decisions about how to spend that time.Given the importance of time management in most jobs, it’s easy to see how games can help develop this skill. The key is to be aware about what your end goals are, what the options are to get to that goal in the time you have, and try and make the best decisions you can. Some decisions don’t need to be made immediately, so best to make them when they need to be done, when you have more information. For example in StarCraft when you start your base, it doesn’t help you to decide what upgrades you’re going to choose, because you don’t have a base yet! So make life easier for your brain and put decisions like that to one side, until they’re needed.Designer’s Notes (SORS):What drew me initially to SORS was that it sounded cool. It was a laser-based technology being used for medical diagnosis. However as I learnt more and more about it, I became more and more amazed at its potential. Part of the fun of creating games like this (and I imagine any science-fiction inspired by real science) is that you can take things as they stand and inject imagination into them. The ‘scanning room’ layout was designed to be futuristic but also easy for the player (in their role as a doctor). It didn’t actually change much throughout development. The screens/information were always arranged around the patient, so the player could see everything she needed to so as to make a diagnosis.Designer’s notes (graph reading):Graphs offered a great way of mirroring the process of disease diagnosis in hospitals. When you first are seen, your symptoms may give doctors a clue as to what you have, but only with tests can their confidence in a correct diagnosis increase.Likewise, in the game, the player may get an initial indication of what the patient has from their first few graph points that appear. However, to be properly sure, they need to keep scanning and build up a clearer picture – much like doctors must do in real life.This is one of my favourite mechanics in the game. Especially as time pressures increase, players are faced with a choice – ‘do I diagnose this patient now, with what I know, or do I keep scanning so I am 100% sure?’It’s a tough call!EuthanasiaWhat is it?Euthanasia is the termination of a very sick person’s life in order to relieve them of suffering. It can be both active (doing something to end their life) or passive (by not doing something, their life ends, for example, not giving them treatment at their request). (http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/euthanasia/overview/introduction.shtml)Euthanasia is illegal in most countries and raises several ethical dilemmas. It has both for and against arguments and supporters, and continues to be a hotly contested topic (Scotland voted on an End of Life Assistance Bill as recently as 2009, although it was defeated).Active euthanasia is currently only legal in Holland, Belgium and Luxembourg. Assisted suicide and passive euthanasia are legal in Switzerland, Germany, Mexico and 5 US states. (http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Euthanasiaandassistedsuicide/Pages/Introduction.aspx).Special assisted suicide clinics, such as Dignitas (Switzerland), are visited by UK citizens who want to end their lives, as it is not possible under UK law. In the game… In the fictional game world, one of the annual events referred to by the characters is ‘EE day’, or ‘enforced euthanasia’ day. As a measure to keep the world’s population in check in the face of growing lifespans and decreased death rates, governments around the world have introduced assisted suicide as a requirement for everyone over a certain age limit. The population accepts it reluctantly in public, but hate it in private and there are still protests every year.Discussion points:- Do players support or oppose euthanasia? Why? Do they support all forms of it (active and passive)?- The idea of euthanasia as a population control mechanic is present in the story but very much hated and resented by the characters. Is this, morally, a point of no return for the governments who have introduced this? Or is it something that must be done, to prevent the population crisis from going out of control?